---
category: early-blog
date: 2010-06
public: false
slug: tw3kr-political-stance
source:
  type: blogger
  url: https://web.archive.org/web/20100805053802/http://tw3kr.blogspot.com/2010/06/political-stance.html
title: Political Stance
---

**DOB**: 16th of June, 1990  
**Country of Residence**: Canada  
**Nationality**: Canadian  
**Political Compass Result**: Economic Left/Right: -1.62 | Social Libertarian/Authoritarian: -7.44  
**Where do you put yourself on the political spectrum**: Minute left-wing  
**Do you indentify yourself with a certain political grouping**: Pragmatic Minarcho-Syndicalism (with small variety of economic regulations)  
**Do you indentify yourself with a certain political party**: No  
**Religion**: None (Agnostic-atheist)  
**Abortion**: For, except for late-term  
**War in Iraq**: Against  
**Marijuana**: Legalized 'n taxed for all purposes  
**Drugs in General**: Legal 'n taxed  
**Firearms**: No  
**Education**: Grade school, high school, college/university should be free, socially oriented. Quality of education should be high priority but not the only one  
**Imperialism**: Immoral if motive is resource and power  
**Communism**: A fantastic ideological idea which one day may be attained but there needs to be a social maturity that comes with slow integrations of social changes through a period of a long time coming. Unrealistic to achieve with a violent revolution, unreliable to maintain on a non-global basis due to having to import from other countries.  
**Socialism**: Another agreeable ideological idea that genuinely should be implemented in a full-fledged state basis with democracy or mixed with regulated democratic capitalism  
**Capitalism**: Good for the people if corporations are regulated and socialistic ideals are implemented. Fantastic at generating resources but promotes selfishness, greed, over-consumption and complements imperialism too nicely for my liking.  
**Gay Marriage**: For  
**Gay adoption**: For  
**Religion in schools**: Against  
**Religious Attitude**: Against all religious faith based reasoning  
**Death penalty**: Against  
**Obama + Biden**: Obama is a centerist who leans slightly to the right-wing  
**UN**: Has little power and effectiveness but was a good idea  
**Patriotism/Nationalism**: Fervently against Nationalism, find Patriotism annoying  
**Global Warming**: Accepted but unconcerned.  
**Genetically Modified Crops**: For.  
**Organic Foods**: Meh  
**Animals**: Should be treated with kindness.  
**China**: Result of the failure of Maoism. Relations are important.  
**Russia**: Result of the failure of Stalinism. Relations are important.  
**EU**: Relations are important.  
**Healthcare**: Should be universal and provided without cost  
**Law**: Emphasis on personal (individual)/innocent-group freedoms and regulation to prevent infringement on personal freedoms. All organizations and institutions however need to be regulated  
**Torture**: Ultimately wrong for any reason  
**Science vs Ethics**: Balanced.  
**Stem Cell Research**: For 
