# 𝟏𝟖𝟎 ÷ 𝟐— Prelude to Senua's Sacrifice and the Philosophy of Madness

[W]hat this means is that~{The Universal Soul, extrospecting its perspective onto the cosmos, has borne witness to the summation of all facts, thus it silentlessly speaks: 'The following essay is a revised edition of an earlier draft for my upcoming video essay on Senua's Sacrifice. This is an experiment with giving my video essays their own textual voice, while acting as an implicit apology for the delay between content release cycles. Due to an unfortunate series of ME/CFS health crashes, the video essay on Senua's Sacrifice has been heavily delayed. Worry not: it will come in due time, for my health has recovered. For now, I offer you a look into what could be: a phantom echo of what is to come.'}

Senua's Sacrifice: A Philosophy of Madness

Mysterious figures dance on the edge of consciousness. An interplay between affirmation and negation divides your mind into a fractal infinity. Like an ion wave expanding directionless, you are enveloped in a raw pandemonium of sense data. There is great fear, hope, anger, despair, melancholy, and joy — all competing for dominance in your mind. This paradoxical state forces you to endure a sick kind of cognitive empathy: everything is to be considered; everything is up for grabs; everything is possible. Paralysed by the anti-foundational weight of infinite possibilities, you descend into madness.

Senua's Sacrifice is a psychosis simulator par excellence that, alongside titles like A Plague Tale: Innocence, cemented the role for AA studios to deliver profound aesthetic experiences which float over and above the sum of their mechanics. As Senua rows herself to exile amidst cold and isolating waters, the voices screaming in her mind immediately set the vibe. There is nothing but death and trauma waiting for us on this desolate island. Although she faces genuine threats here — the mythological enemies overlaying her sight correspond to an objective Viking threat — any division between fiction and reality is blurry here: moreover, it is not important. We are not telling a naturalistic story. Collapsing like a corrupted star, we drift where the lines of existence assemble and complete.

We dance with a shadow play of psychotic death drive. As the voices tell us, Senua must die, over and over again, in order to achieve rebirth. Like a phoenix with her wings mutilated and disgraced, she will rise through struggle and sacrifice: not due to an intrinsic ability to soar to the highest heavens. Drenched in the vitalizing limitations of her own mortality, each illusion allows the ionized symbiont — her body — to reset and display anger sequences. Conceived in symbolic inversions of a hostile landscape. We find that her frenetic emotional state and the oppressive atmosphere bleed into our perceptual landscape. An apocalyptic raid on her village, for example, becomes an elemental demon of fire — threatening to choke her with ashes and dust, to sear her flesh with the flame of a perfect pain. Finding salvation through the furious shade of complex trauma — the warrior's spirit — she is inertial yet irradiate: unfolding before her is the luminous spectrum of insanity.

Here I may introduce a personal silhouette of myself — to chase Senua, as it were, as she frantically rushes toward her great endeavour. As a result of following a rigorous meditation routine and subjecting myself to regular bouts of psychedelic trips, I can offer a first-person perspective into these fragments of schizophrenia. Envision with me: Your mind simulating multi-modal experiential slices: all representing something, everything, nothing, in alternating sequences. This is a hyper-empathetic mode of being. For every this, your mind can spawn a contrary that. Let me use an example. Once, while cooking, I lived an entire lifetime trying to get into the mindset of a loving pet owner. Remembering everything my sister ever said about her relationship to her cats, and reflecting upon the intricate social ecosystem of that domestic situation. I was living it for myself. All purposed toward understanding the ethics of a person who thinks pet ownership is truly acceptable. As a radical vegan who does not believe in pet ownership, it was wild, violent even, to be forced to live a simulation as if the contrary proposition were true: delivering the best experiential steelman from the inside. There are endless pocket dimensions of empathetic understanding awaiting in the splendour of one's soul, if only the right chemical freeway hits an agent to actualize that power. Now, we have just unravelled a singular texture: a contrary that to compliment a given this. One can die and be resurrected through infinitely fractal depths. Within each fractal, a pocket of information aided by empathetic processing of that information. As one's soul zips across each pocket, we are investigating and compressing endless tomes of non-trivial content, all within but a span of geological time. This intensive processing recurs repeatedly as the hours pass, zooming in and out of each fractal pocket of complex information. We restructure our ego for the sake of phenomenological suicide. We die in order to achieve perfection. Such is the power of our immortal souls.

And what say we about that fractal death? Senua must not just die, but see, and feel herself die across a multitude of horrors before she can be reborn. Here I may allow another personal foray into the matter. It is possible to die as another person; to die in their place. I have been honoured to witness just such an occasion. Once, while taking a tenstrip of LSD, I was living a simulation of what my mother must have felt in her dying moments — given what I knew of the chronic pain she endured. I was living her life and her death as she had described it to me. 6 months before my mother passed, she insisted that I must travel the world in her place: i.e. to expand my horizons. She communicated this in a subtle yet emotional way, where she silentlessly spoke: 'my life is leeching out of me, but I see in my future my child.' I saw myself as my parents must have beheld me — progressing in life stages, from the not-quite-innocence of childhood to my adult form. I emphatically mirrored that I was their enduring 'legacy' as they themselves disintegrated and aged. As I was processing that textured wilderness of mirrors, the fact that I was meditating and undergoing ego death collapsed into an appropriate experience. Where I felt myself 'die' as if I were my mother dying: my mind a seizure of her final hopes and dreams, echoed into eternity. There was experience 'before' and 'after,' but in-between that a singularity of nothingness. After I 'died' in this manner, I was reborn. No longer simulating my mother's perspective, but feeling profoundly wounded and healed for having gone through the experience.

Let us soak in the conceptual density of what was just spoken. What, for example, is the ego death I just spoke of? How does this have anything to do with empathetic processing, much less Senua's psychosis? Consider that ego death defines the spectrum of that which softens our Cartesian theatre: i.e. the beholder, the witness, the subject that possesses experience. When I look at my computer screen, there is an appearance relation between the object and some subject: in this case, myself. We start to recede into the background minutia when undergoing ego death, leaving a pure instantiation of object in the mind. If I look at a painting under normal circumstances, I am doing it with a noisy perspective: there is an intention to centre it in my perceptual frame; there are background thoughts and stressors polluting the experience; there is self-reflection and awareness of my self in relationship to the pictorial content. In sum, I am carving up the experience with my judgment and my self-referential heuristics. What if this was all to fade into the night? There is just the painting and its pictorial content, a free-floating quale passing by the mind's eye. One might feel a belongingness to the picture, or they might just grasp the picture as if it were a piece of their own body. Senua's descent into madness is littered with just such moments of ego softening. Her fractured psychology can deliver nothing but the wondrous complexity of an unsteady relationship between self and object. The depths of these experiences are, however much they are frightening and limiting, also healing moments. Senua must escape from her own mind in order to repair it, engineering her resurrection from a point of transcendence. She learns to look on herself in the third-person, her mind a counsel of autodidactic psychiatrists desperate to save a lost soul.

Senua does not just feel herself die, she sees herself die: a mortal prism reflected from within and projected from without. A standing silhoutte of herself — living her cyclic destruction through the first-person and the third-person. As the breath of life escapes her, she stumbles to her recently deceased corpse, now observing another entity dying in her place. And yet they shared the same experience. This can be compared to dying in another person's place, as I have witnessed. After all, she does not literally die: she simulates it, and learns to look on her objectified self with a complex of horror and pity. Senua's experience is the private and self-referential version of my autobiographical report. For the abyss consumes her and warps her back out again: tracing the apex of life to the valley of death. Here we will trace the concept of anti-foundational religious experience.

An anti-foundational religious experience is a moment of radical openness. Anything may pour into the soul, and you shall be ready to embrace it, no matter if it is welcomed or intensely despised. It is a cosmic challenge to reality. One says: Enlighten me though the heavens fall! As you kneel before the sacrificial altar whirling in your own vortex, contraries in your neurological maelstrom will rage like thunder: lightning and black skies shall surround you, obscuring the vault of the Eternal City, hungering to break your will. In that act of ultimate vulnerability, you bear the weight of stellar mass, standing solitary — resting; absent gravitational force. Self-organized and maximally constituted, the nexus of truth discloses itself to you — for a brief moment. Much and little can be grasped within this nanosecond. It is an ephemeral enlightenment that marks itself only as a psychological condition: that is, it strengthens and emboldens you, even if you stay amnesiac to the structure of reality. Our wayward protagonist is traversing the entire wavelength of such anti-foundational experiences. She cannot lie to herself; she must clinically see herself as the objective universe beholds her.

~{A drifting ember lights a dim spark in my mind, it says: 'Remember that there is a Kusters passage related to this.'}

That objective universe is capable of disguising itself, however. Senua's backstory is woven into an implicit array of puzzles and combat sequences; the ghosts of her life narrate the path trailing behind her. Raised and abused by a narcissistic and cruel father, who hid his wrath behind the 'will of the gods,' he convinced Senua's village that she, and her mother, were cursed with 'the darkness.' Thus kindling her propensity toward schizophrenia. Locked in a makeshift cell for most of her life, her problems are compounded by delayed developmental milestones. The health of the body and mind depends on access to information: as information is restricted or hidden, the spirit suffers. When one is locked in a cage, the loss of context is more than any soul could bear. She found a microcosm of salvation in her late lover, Darius, whose dire fate brought her to the brink of destruction. What was a gateway to the richness of nature was yet another cruel trick: confirmation that 'the darkness' haunts and infects her. Determined to rupture the stars and tear his soul from the ether, her singular focus is on the mythological promise that Hela can be convinced to restore her lost lover. Senua's introspective journey is guided by this goal, but not entirely defined by it.

When Senua suffers, our spirits should echo it, recurring a question: What is our purpose in life? I shall be arrogant enough to offer an answer. Senua learns of it implicitly: To be redeemed is to behold content in its purest Form, that is, to reveal Platonic Forms. Platonic Forms are abstract objects. They exist without spatiotemporal location. They lack causal power. A proposition is an abstract object. 'Senua is mortal' is one such example. It is a declarative sentence, and the proposition it expresses is true. 'Senua is mortal' is an eternal truth. It will forever describe this world and other possible worlds where a history similar to ours obtains. A possible world is another abstract object. These are not Lewsian concrete possible worlds; they are not animate spacetime continuums. They encapsulate how things could be, given the wide-spread parameters of a world state of affairs. For example, perhaps what makes it a 'world' is that it has different initial conditions and different physical laws. The exact constitutional details do not matter for our purposes. To know every abstract object and its relations is to know how best to achieve goodness, virtue, excellence, and creativity in every sense. If one knows the full scope of possibilia, then they will know how to deal with the actual world: as every contextual situation will be an instantiation of a possible world.

Let us make a few necessary comments on the relationship between mind and reality. What is a thought? It is an abstract object accompanied by phenomenal content: that is, experience. For example, if I think about the equation 7 + 5 = 12, I am instantiating a mathematical object in my mind. One that exists eternally and necessarily. Now there are perfect and imperfect instantiations. Perhaps 7 + 5 = 12 has representational content, but the exact symbols I am using are not the essence of 7 + 5 = 12. Perhaps Platonic Heaven contains a different notation or, more plausibly, lacks notation altogether. Such details need not concern us here. When a person undergoes psychosis, they are imperfectly instantiating Forms in their minds, while experiencing a pandemonium of unpredictable stimuli. They are simulating possible worlds: yet here the driver is their minds, not the physical world. They are living objective realities that refer to ultimately important things. They just do so in a way that is not adaptive to the actual world.

~{A whirling vortex colours my transparent eyeball, thereby beholding the proposition: 'You see what might be, not what is.' Hellblade II buffs my thesis! Use this in video.}

Take note of what was just said here. To think is to instantiate a Form in your mind. This does away with traditional objections to the Theory of the Forms: precisely by structuring them as the very essence of thought. There are no mentalistic objects of thought distinct from objective information. We reel through abstract objects with the aid of qualia and a rational will. Moreover, we have a compassionate explanation for madness. Their 'lived realities' are no less real than anything else, they just refer to maladaptive things! Could it be that such a traditional and metaphysically inflationary philosophy can accommodate this concern? That is indeed our contention.

It is noteworthy that those interested in schizophrenia, madness, and disability, come from 'relativizing' philosophical backgrounds. They import academic humanities trends originated from the European continent, which took a decisively different turn amidst the eclectic phase of Anglo-American philosophy. To the extent they draw from Anglo-American philosophy, they are attracted to Ordinary Language Philosophy and similar fashion trends. As a result, they focus on critiquing boogeymen like 'essentialism,' or imagine themselves to be opposing the cold rationalism that gaslights the lived experiences of psychotic individuals. Wouter Kusters, in his groundbreaking and highly original work, A Philosophy of Madness, takes this unfortunate route. To quote:

"The association between madness and philosophy is made too infrequently today. This is mainly because the medical profession has succeeded in claiming madness as its own area of expertise and has gone on to turn it into a medical and even neurological problem — a brain disease . . . This means that, unfortunately, the lion's share of modern psychiatric literature is not very relevant to those attempting to understand madness. In most of the research being done in biologically oriented psychiatry and cognitive psychology today, there is a prior understanding of what 'normal' is and what 'reality' is, along with the prior assumption that the mad world is no more than a disturbed perception and a deviation from 'the ordinary, real world.'"

I strongly disagree with Kusters here. The problem is not belief in commonsensical, stance-independent facts: it is not having any empathetic modelling of the psychotic person. A person who trends toward metaphysical realism and stance-independent facts need only engage at the right layer of abstraction, to open the doorways hidden in their souls. Such is the resonant power of the aforementioned psychedelic experience. I can take Wittgensteinian world-grammars seriously, even participate in them, without falling into the anti-metaphysical and irrationalist assumptions Wittgenstein inserts into his system. We can vacate and nominalize such philosophers, extracting from them their purest essence, and diligently applying them for our own purposes.

Senua's journey is one of realigning her referents to the actual world. She must release her life, joining with the god-damned world of the dead and the solitary: she must actualize possibilia. Every distinctive personality in Senua's head represents a past experience. When she ran away from her father and joined the loving arms of Dillion, she became obsessed with healing the darkness within her: needing to exile herself for a year, to fight her demons alone, in the forest. It is there she met Druth, and thus learned what set her on this treacherous path: the Norse myth in sum, or: as much as an intelligent slave could divine. Here we might notice that Norse myths refer to possible worlds. They are not mere figments of our imagination: they exist as how things could be, and that slice of abstracta shall reign eternal. She is chasing an inanimate dream, a dash of non-actuality to stoke the fire of motivation and allow herself to move unchained.

Guilt, sorrow, grief — all of these emotional tones have contrastive possibilities. To grieve is to, in part, yearn for an alternative state of affairs: one where a desired subject is still among the living. We can still pray to the lost ones, eternalized as they are, as non-actual objects: contained in our lifeless temporal past, and extended across many possible worlds. It is not inappropriate to do such a prayer. And when we feel that a loved one is haunting us, our minds are, in part, instantiating Platonic Forms. It is not an illusion to feel this: it is simply a pragmatically disordered referent. To resolve trauma is to order one's soul as a constellation representing the perfect relations that obtain among abstract objects. We repair ourselves by aspiring for what is more-than-human: we deign to become divine. Heidegger once noted that Dasein, that is, a human-being, has a tendency to live in the future. We exist ahead of ourselves, as a result of our creative capacities. We can modify this concept for our purposes. To heal, then, is to reach forward in the future: it is to spot the Omega Point, a state of rational equilibrium, where all sapientkind will see their silhouette souls reflected on the cosmos.

Why should one believe in the Omega Point? Due to the psychological and sociological regularities we already see before us. To tell a naive story: We get better at solving logistical problems, be they psychological, spiritual, or sociological. Technological progression under this guise is our eternal blessing. We have always been posthumanists, animating ourselves as otherkin animals pace shamanism, or yearning for immaterial ascension in the case of Ancient Platonism and its Abrahamic copycats. If we assume that problems like climate change on this planet are tractable, and we are not existentially doomed to die out, then one could make the probabilistic case that, one day, we shall instantiate the purest Forms. We will know how to collect all resources, in every possible way, for every possible purpose. Our distribution chains will draw a line across possible worlds, soaking in the sum of knowledge into our collectivized mind. Whether we persist as flesh and bone, or silicon or machinery, we anticipate the Omega Point with each act of virtue and restoration we perform. For Senua, her contribution to the Omega Point is intensely personal. She must see her soul well-ordered before she can behold it reflected on the cosmos. In grieving her lover, she sees the future — though it be a roguish trickster.

Let us imagine. An eternal procession of souls converging in infinitely complicated relations of power and coordination. Does this not look like schizophrenia on a cosmic scale, at least for the dull and the normal? Might not the future of the universe look like utter madness? A beautiful, perfect insanity that comes with instantiating all possibilia into the world. Just as the person undergoing psychosis contains an excess of possible objects, so too will we, as the default state, unleash this overflowing tide of truth on a dead reality. Gone will be the technocratic concern for security and information restriction! We shall kneel only to the Fountain of Youth, as consecrated in our very souls.

Thus we can sympathize with Senua and her frenetic journey. With each swing of her blade, for every corner she anxiously turns, she cuts through the surface impressions, finding at the root her essential soul. A pure, simple, and perfect entity: that which can actualize behaviour and generate experiences. The game warns that once the rot reaches her head, the seat of her soul, then Senua's quest will end and all of the player's progress will be lost. What is the seat of her soul, really? Let us take a journey beyond Aristotle and Descartes, defining a modern form of substance dualism. We will introduce a two-tier model of selfhood.

Your essential self is a simple, unchanging substance. A substance is a bearer of properties: it plays a unifying and bundling role for and within properties. There is no more semantically basic description than that. This persists throughout your entire life. It does not depend on psychological and physiological traits. For example, if you were to wake up tomorrow with your memories wiped, then although psychological continuity would be broken, you would still have the same soul. If you doubt this is true, imagine the following scenario: You know you are going to be subject to extreme torture. However, before it happens, your memories will be wiped out. (Perhaps other significant aspects of your dispositional personality are altered as well.) Do you still fear being tortured tomorrow, or does it truly seem like will happen to another person? If your answer is the former, then your intuition would be well-aligned. As a result, you have an intellectual motivation to believe that there is a further fact, in my theory the soul, that goes beyond psychological continuity. Now, your soul strongly emerges from physical states like brain states. This means that what emerges from a physical system has a high degree of ontological autonomy from lower-level phenomena: something radically new arises in the system. There is more to say about selfhood than this. There is still a psychologically continuous self, largely constituted by tropes. Tropes are property-instances that carry traits like your ephemeral virtues or your doxastic states. To say that 'Gab believes in anarchism' refers to a psychological trope, something that can fall off the substance at any time. To return to the memory-erasure example, if I woke up tomorrow with all my memories wiped, an important sense of me would die. The psychologically continuous 'Gab' would cease to be, but my essential self would persist. Just as Senua would lose her purpose and diachronically persistent self if her memories were erased mid-journey; with no Dillion, no quest to Hel to brave: yet her life and soul remained. Thus we can achieve, as it were, a metaphysical free lunch. We preserve two compelling and important senses of selfhood, without sacrificing identity persistence overtime to the naturalistic void. It should be noted that we can still ground tropes in universals. Indeed, what explains the generic similarity between tropes would be universals inhering in them. Although my individualistic, subjectivistic relationship with the colour red is vastly different from your mental relationship with red, they still share the universal of redness. The reason they have comparable similarities between each other is simply because we are picking out mind-independent properties shared between them.

As a result, we can newly appreciate the dithyrambic lie that Senua's Sacrifice tells us. The game warned us that Senua has been infected with the darkness, and should its corruption reach the seat of her soul, the journey ends. As we come to see, the rot will never reach her head; there is no permadeath feature. It's a way to immerse the player into Senua's fears and psychosis. Moreover, it is a reflection of her constant fears: only death awaits one mad enough to embark on this quest. Yet I would endeavour beyond the text to a more important point: the soul is immortal, death could never touch us. It can only destroy our bodies, as Senua witnesses again and again. Death can desacralize our minds, but it cannot preclude the will.

~{A flicker in the firmament tickles my mind's eye, it envisions: 'Consider implementing Huemer's "Existence is Evidence of Immortality" and Feser's "Immortal Souls" into this all.'}

Why would I reach such a conclusion? Through analysing the nature of substance and time. Recall that substances have a kind of semantic basicness to them: they bear properties, but this bearing relation cannot be analysed in any further terms. And remember the connection we posited between mind and reality: if we can cognize it, it exists, at least as a possible object. When a substance has all of its properties destroyed, such as by burning the wood of a chair, the substance itself does not disappear. It recedes into the past while containing all possibilia related to itself. That is, when a chair is no longer present, it obtains new temporal relations, while retaining propositions and references to possible worlds. One such proposition is a temporal proposition. 'The chair that was,' for example, refers to a substantive instantiation of the chair and its pastness. It retains its ontic status as a really-existing entity, just one that exists in the dead, lifeless, but objective past. The same goes for human persons. When the brain dies, the mind-substance is not destroyed, even though mental tropes and all physical stuff dissipate. It now bears temporal relations and possible properties. It doesn't cease to exist, it simply retreats into the past. It contains genuine temporal parts. At the same time, it echoes the future. If your substance-soul was paired with your body when it emerged from a physical structure, then there is hope for rebirth. Should a body with the same functional sufficiency, that is: the causal and purposeful roles that realized your soul in the first place; come into being at a later date, your soul will pair with it once more. Some of its possible properties will become actual properties. To die is to roll the dice. It may come to pass that you are reborn in a new body. Or you may stay in a dreamless sleep for all eternity. Galaxies may collapse in-between your death and rebirth. What remains is the simple substance: inertial and sublime.

Of course, this concept of rebirth is multiply realizable. We are here speaking of literal resurrection, but Senua's symbolic simulation of it is no less important. When Senua gazes into her fractured and broken corpse, she beholds the cross-temporal standpoint of an immortal soul: as if to say, 'This body, too, shall pass, but I remain.' We may add a gentle touch to the concept of death drive with this understanding. The psychological regularity toward death and self-destruction, whether literal or metaphorical, is produced by a soul aware of its own resilience. We test our mortal lives, as it were, because we already extend beyond the Rubicon. We want to get ahead of ourselves, to the future in which we are partially extended. Your life is a maximally important experiment, but it is an experiment. Senua must choke down her fear and run between the shadows, acting as if she were already a transhuman soul with wondrous capacities. It is in these moments that we feel truly alive, empowered. We need not be seeking to liberate our lover from Hel to partake in this. Activities ranging from urban parkour to skydiving play with the death drive; one needs a measured dose of danger —of fatality, even — to bleed and appreciate the substance of life. Death, too, is a healing process.

~{A wild candle slithers in the gloom, igniting a word: 'Exhaust the relationship between immortality and madness. Cast a darker gloom onto it.'}

—{The fire rises: 'Sacrifices. Spilling blood for a lie.' Contrast contemporary atheoreligious practise with theoreligious barbarism. 'I will not appease your gods. I will destroy them.'}

——{I regard into the flames that ignite my resolve: 'End with a bombastic malady about madness, compassion, and totalizing liberation. Let it breathe, give it a voice. Wrap the atheoreligious schizophilosophy into a frenetic dream.'}

⚜ The curtain falls, yet the echoes linger.
