---
category: articles
date: 2024-10-18
slug: god-is-the-only-impossible-object
source:
  type: patreon
  url: https://www.patreon.com/posts/god-is-only-116262980
tags:
- philosophy
title: God is the Only Impossible Object
---

When I use a phrase like 'possible object,' what comes to mind? Concrete Lewisian possible worlds? Plantinga's excessive exploits in modal logic? Do you hear Saul Kripke's damaged vocal cords reverberating in your auditory eye? Do you expect me to define possible object concept #1, as opposed to competing definitions of 'possible object' #2-9001? No such courtesy will be granted here. I will trust that the reader can take a vibe-based approach to concepts, and interrogate ChatGPT about anything they need clarified. Philosophy articles should not be *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* entries.

**I. Mind and Noesis**

Intentional objects do not exist as uniquely *mentalistic* objects. They are instantiations of concrete universals and abstract Forms. Concrete universals are all-pervasive in space and across living minds: they enjoy spatial extension without bearing physical properties. As a result of lacking physical properties, they non-competitively occupy space. We can see in concrete universals a diminished and naturalized concept of *aether*. It is reasonable to suppose that concrete universals possess causal powers, or primitive abilities to adjust the objective propensity of events. Yellowness, for example, is a concrete universal instantiated in lemons. When light strikes a yellow lemon, the event of the lemon *appearing yellow* is a manifestation of the causal power that concrete yellowness retains. Yellowness is not just a concrete universal. All instantiations of yellow participate in the abstract Form of yellowness. Forms lack spatiotemporal location altogether: they are eternal and quantify over a complex nest of possible worlds and truthmakers. Furthermore, they do not possess causal power. What separates concrete objects from abstract objects is the possession of causal power *or* extension in space. One disjunctive condition being met is alternatively sufficient to achieve the demarcation. (For example, we might think that many concrete universals lack causal power, but enjoy spatial extension. More exotically, we might think that superliminal information lacks spatial extension, but enjoys causal power.)

When we cognize, we instantiate concrete universals and Forms in our minds. If we do this imperfectly, we only achieve partial instantiation. The thoughts of a person going through psychosis will be littered with partial instantiations, however much they might *feel* like perfect instantiations to the subject. Thoughts, then, are either partial or full instantiations of Forms that are accommodated by *phenomenal* feels. We are committed to the existence of non-conceptual content, or otherwise irreducible qualia. To think is to *reflect* objective information with accompanied sensory flow, phenomenal feels, qualia, or whatever synonym we might use. The partial instantiation of Forms and universals can *explain* madness: the ravings of a schizophrenic person in the deepest affrays of psychosis tend to make a non-linear kind of sense, at least to patient and intelligent observers. (One should read *A Philosophy of Madness* by Wouter Kusters for an illuminating look into this chaotic world.) Madness can embody heterodox order: for no subject of experience truly lacks the irreducible power to instantiate Forms.

As a result, epistemological questions about what I am proposing — which is essentially a theory of *intrinsic intentionality*, notably championed by Laurence BonJour — are malphrased metaphysical questions. Since we have an identity relationship between thoughts and Forms plus concrete universals, we do not ascend to pairing problems and causal mysteries. We think in ways that could not be otherwise: they are alternatively imperfect and perfect instantiations of the Forms. Objective information in its purest sense. Concrete universals are grounded in Forms: they are like an image of that eternal world of abstracta, reflected into space and into mind-stuff. As a consequence, the mind is probably immaterial. It is a unified substance that bears non-physical information. This is not a philosophy of mind piece, however, so I will not entertain creative ways in which we could render this compatible with physicalism. Refer to the preface and remind yourself of the damaging effects that overly-explaining oneself have on philosophy.

So we have immaterial minds with the irreducible power to instantiate Forms and concrete universals. What about thoughts that are fleeting, private, ephemeral, and free-floating? These are *tropes*. Tropes are property-instances. Tropes explain the individuality and ephemeral nature of some of our thoughts, same too with hyper-localized properties in space: such as that of a decaying atom. However, they are not divorced from Forms and concrete universals. Forms and concrete universals explain the generic similarities that exist between tropes. For example, I might think about redness in a very unique and localized way, but it is constituted by generic content that necessarily reflects concrete universals and Forms: redness *simpliciter*. So we have a tripartite structure to thought and to reality. Tropes, concrete universals, and abstract Forms. All complimenting each other at differing levels of locality and universality, offering distinctive explanatory roles. Everything is ultimately derivative of the Forms, of course. Forms embody necessary connections and transworld descriptions. Quantifying over possibilities that are not actualized. For example, 'a meteor striking the Earth yesterday' is an unobtaining, objective state of affairs. It is a possibility, one that we can hold close to our minds, and must in order to be fully rational agents. Forms find *appropriate ontological fitness* with such unobtaining state of affairs. By their very nature, they contain and reflect the description of possibility just provided. We do not need excessive theoretical bloat to either 'naturalize' or 'mentalize' their nature. They simply are.

**II. All Conceivable Objects Strictly Exist, Except God**

When we posit alternative possibilities, such as by writing fictional stories, we do not merely invent mentalistic information in our heads. We instantiate possible objects and possible worlds in our minds. As a nearly exceptionless rule, if we can conceive of something, it is possible, and therefore existent in a meaningful sense. For example, a possible world where berries do not exist is an objectively real and close world. It is not a causally active world: it is not a material universe with differing initial conditions that led to the non-existence of berries. It is an entirely abstract object. However, it still *exists*. This explains why our fictional imaginations can be well-ordered and subject to logical rules. Simply because that is exactly what they are: possible worlds amenable to fundamental laws. Nothing is *strictly* fictional in the traditional sense. To think at all is to be in contact with objective information dispersed in the structure and constitution of reality.

There is one exception: God does not exist. Indeed, God is impossible. It is the *only* impossible object. Why would I make such a claim? I will assume that any *religiously meaningful* conception of God requires these divine attributes:

- Omnipotence.
- Omniscience.
- Omnibenevolence.
- Aseity.

These four attributes provide an existentially and religiously *satisfying* conception of God. Nothing else scratches the religious itch. It encapsulates a being worthy of maximal praise. It embodies the Good in a perfect and non-trivial way. It can design, plan, and do anything that is logically possible. Such an entity, if it existed, would be wondrous and awe-inspiring. However, its existence is precluded by our radical platonism. The Forms threaten divine aseity. God would be derivative of necessary connections, truthmakers, and irreducible normative properties that exist independently of itself. If we give up aseity, we give up its ultimate explanatory role in the world: instead of being the first cause and explanation of everything not identical to itself, it is a kind of hackneyed middle-man, copying the eternal Forms and usurping their glory! Such a being seems to be religiously demoted in its status, to say the least. If all that we religiously care about — goodness, beauty, salvation, ultimate explanation — is embodied in a rich constellation of Forms, concrete universals, and tropes, then this middle-man is useless. Worse than useless. *It* is impossible! The Forms and their derivative entities occupy such satisfying explanatory and metaphysical roles, that they vacate the meaningful conception of God into nothingness. At best, we might be describing the most powerful, all-knowing, and benevolent kind of agent, but not in a privileged sense worth calling *God*.

Here is a helpful contrast to illustrate why this sense of God is disenfranchised. We could imagine a transhumanist future that creates agents of infinite complexity and goodness. Eric Steinhart has detailed such entities in his eccentric book, *Ritual Kindles Vision*. They infinitely surpass themselves in an infinite progression to the Good. In his words, they can play infinitely complicated games of chess and basketball; and create infinitely beautiful works of art. They are maximally self-congruent, self-realized instantiations of the Good. They are nearly identical to it, even though nothing can be identical to the Good. This looks very much like a monotheistic deity as deprived of divine aseity. But should we call such future beings 'gods' or 'God' in the standard sense? The intuitive answer seems to be a resounding **no**. And if this is true of forward-looking cases created by technology, it seems equally true of a backwards-looking case for a being that has always existed. Nothing about temporal direction seems critical for rendering God religiously important. Aseity is a unifying concept that makes all the other divine attributes explanatorily and religiously impressive. We have just precluded that. As a result, God, in the non-trivial and valuable sense of the concept, simply cannot exist. It is the *only* impossible object.

One might make an obvious objection here. Surely there are all sorts of impossible objects, like squared circles and false arithmetic propositions (such as '2 + 2 = 5'). My answer is two-fold. First, if they are impossible objects, they are not *interestingly* impossible objects: they are just analytic trivialities that are false by virtue of a logical contradiction. Here I am using the Fregean conception of analyticity: where analytic statements reflect some fundamental logical law, embodied in conventional terms synonym by synonym. This can be seen as rejecting the analytic-synthetic distinction altogether. Where that debate lies does not concern me. Secondly, it is arguable that analytic falsehoods do not even ascend to the realm of possible or impossible objects. They are just nonsense. They are malformed, incomplete objects. They are not even the sensible nonsense home to psychotic rants. To call them impossible objects is almost misspeaking. God, on the other hand, is fully coherent, and substantial, and the implication of its existence is radical. As we have seen, to cognize is to instantiate an object, whether actual or possible. And everything exists as at least a possible object, neatly clustered in a possible world. *Everything* strictly exists *in some sense*. As the supreme exception, God does not exist: due to the very nature of Forms, concrete universals, and tropes. They cast it into Platonic Hell: a tidy concept for a realm where impossible and non-existent objects reside, or rather *do not even reside*.

**III. Religious Implications**

For some people, such a worldview is bleak. To them, the world has been stripped of truth, beauty, and eternal goodness. The world is a little dimmer, carrying the undertone of hopelessness. We are left with the grey waste, unenchanted by a being of absolute perfection. Such a casting is misguided, however. What we have been touching on is the irreducible nature of normative properties. Perfections are abundant: they are perfect objects residing in imperfect and perfect possible worlds. Plenty of goods exist, all grounded in the irreducible Good. Spontaneous acts of kindness, for example, instantiate the Good. Beauty is ubiquitous: the natural cosmos is filled with wonder and splendour, such as stars and galaxies. As elegantly described by non-natural, aesthetic facts about cosmic properties and relations. Indeed, if this were not the case for normative properties, we would have a swarm of theoretical problems to face.

In the theistic dimension, where God is involved in explaining or encapsulating the Good, we face endless renditions of the Euthyphro Dilemma: is God's nature or essence good because it is good, or is God's goodness derivatively conferred by the essence or nature of God? In the first case, we admit secular truthmakers for God's goodness: the normative standards are independent of it. (Threatening divine aseity once more.) In the second case, we seem to have an impossible reduction, comparable to the is-ought gap haunting ethical naturalism. It would make sense if God's essence or nature is necessarily good, as a metaphysical fact about itself that reflects the irreducible Good, but if a pre-normative aspect of God's essence or nature confers and constitutes goodness, we seem to have recreated the unbridgeable is-ought gap. God cannot self-constitute goodness without making a reduction that is naturalistic in spirit. As a result, normative facts are necessarily secular. Our reasons for rejecting this *divine reductionism* will be parity reasons to reject alternative, secular theories like ethical naturalism. We can note that this recurs our persistent reason for holding that God is the only impossible object: we have vacated, alongside his aseity, even his self-constitutional goodness. The Death of God is achieved by a thousand metaphysical cuts.

All is good and beautiful in virtue of participating in sui generis goodness and beautifulness. Blessed are we, then, that we have no obfuscating middle-man getting in the way of our ability to instantiate and embody the Good, the True, and the Beautiful! We can focus our activities on meditation and prayer to non-deistic entities, reflecting our perfect souls. Accumulating virtue and excellence in our physical lives, absent the distraction of theistic shadow plays. We have a crystalline and absolute focus on what *really matters*: the activities and struggles that reflect sui generis normative facts, which enjoy their own aseity that is more divine than divinity. The eternal light of the Good shines upon us, mandating that we actualize ourselves and behold our silhouettes reflected upon the cosmos. Dare we defy this ultimate privilege and burden?
