Devil May Cry is an awkward weebslop series made by auspecial people and for auspecial people. DmC: Devil May Cry, on the other hand, is the feverish dream of a drug addict who has old blueprints of their high school lying around. We can borrow the nomenclature of YouTube's famous verbal blackface actor and call this a Kirkbride-type reboot. The Kirkbride mindset delineates the rarest way to reboot a series. It involves deep study of the source material, making new connections that are best seen through amphetamine-induced hyperconcentration - a phenomenological dance with schizophrenia, giving neuronormies novel ways to access the text of reality. DmC: Devil May Cry is a forbidden experiment with this dark creative impulse and, as a result, legions of straight edge mouth breathers have made their dissatisfaction known.

Having decided that profanity and cigarettes are cool, DmC provides a welcome surrealist punk twist on an aesthetically barren universe. When your frame of reference is shallow due to your sensory processing differences, subtle aesthetic clues like the overuse of expletives may be lost on you - leading to a childish outcry that the Succubus encounter is 'edgy' and 'forced.' While this, of course, describes an intentional characteristic of the stand-offish dialogue, no amount of creative license can justify failing to replicate award-winning performances known to the original series. Did anyone else get goosebumps when sXe-Dante yelled: "I should have been the one to fill your dark soul with light!" Simply epic.

None of that can be found in DmC: Devil May Cry. We instead find a frighteningly bold aesthetic direction - one that can induce symptoms of sensory overload if you have forgotten to take your Abilify. You will spend most of the game interfacing with the real-world by proxy - residing in 'Limbo,' which will bathe the world in orange and teal to maximize that pre-vaporwave vibe. It is admittedly true that every design decision feels carefully considered by an intelligent - and suspiciously neurotypical - mind, but much like a gifted child who screams when the coffee maker has moved to the other side of the countertop, fans of the original series can only notice one thing: nu-Dante is a different character.

This mind-blowing exposition of such a subtle design change aside, many fans of the original series will admit that while, yes, DmC delivers a killer soundtrack, innovative visuals, prescient environmental storytelling, and an impressively cinematic take on moment-to-moment gameplay, it has one unfortunate flaw: the fighting mechanics are simple this time around. While in the grand scheme of things this objection is akin to complaining that Call of Duty 4 fails to sport an Arena FPS weapon arsenal, I have been assured that this is a deal breaker. I suppose one can tolerate the sterile and bland environmental palette of Devil May Cry 3 when the world is but an excuse to achieve your 9-step combos.

DmC: Devil May Cry is ambitious, daring, and incomplete - Ninja Theory would not find their footing until Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice. Sparks of their future brilliance can be found in this controversial entry, however, knocking over the rigidly designed sand castles of people who adhere to strict male social roles. If you want to deeply appreciate the fact that gamers despise art and desire only an industry of consumer wish fulfillment, give this game a spin and then speak about your experience online. You have nothing to lose but your sense of kinship with other human-beings.
