Enter November 2004. Linkin Park's 'Meteora' was released over a year ago. We are approaching peak nu-metal. Effeminate yet hypermasculine bands screaming their angst to the pattern of 0-3-5 guitar riffs have a stranglehold on the youth. Although the 90s effectively killed edge with poor marketing campaigns - John Romero did not make us his bitch - the aughties couldn't resist a flirtatious dance with our shadow selves. Having signed up with Stuart Chatwood, Ubisoft endeavoured to make a timeless Iranian metal classic wrapped in the skin of a video game. For those who believe 'authentic Persian aesthetics' must resemble a Disney movie, this is processed as mere 'heavy metal' - seen to be a jarring tonal shift away from the idyllic fantasy of despotic regimes sporting a human face. Their suffering is intensified by Godsmack being nominally involved with this entry: the instrumental version of 'I Stand Alone' making its way into Dahaka chase sequences - their music generally present across the marketing trailers for this game; trailers that are wonderfully crafted like any semi-professional AMV typical of 2004.

"I can't control you: you're not my destiny." The title credits rolling to the tune of 'Straight Out Of Line' act as a mission statement: You will bathe in individualistic ultra-edge, and you shall enjoy it. What's striking are the cherry-picked moments of controversy that precipitated this game's launch. BDSM-themed enemies who masochistically get off to you killing them sparked no reaction. Nobody observed the fact that every character is deeply sociopathic, angry, and self-centred. What sparked the ire of mother culture nerds scared of feeling emotions was the Prince uttering the lines: "You bitch!" It seems we will never be free from the curse of middle-class morality.

Although I oppose self-insert characterization, I have to confess something: the Prince is exactly like me. You see, I too know what it's like to have my midlife crisis confused for teenage angst. What is understood by spiritual jarheads to be free-floating rebellion is actually the weight of trauma and hardship bearing down on one's soul. When this condition commingles with a warrior's spirit, metastasizing your fight-or-flight reflex across the entire body, a certain pulverization of spirit obtains - the existential mineralization fed by tooth decay and atrophied bone density. Such is the imagery invoked by the subtitle: 'Warrior Within.' This is a surprisingly uplifting message for a game otherwise drenched in tonal darkness, but for yuppified comfort addicts, legitimate struggles are a myth. There is only the dissatisfied whine of ingrates and malcontents. Recalling superfluous internet memes boosted by hypernormies: that every expression of anguish is tantamount to screaming at your factory-ready mother and caretaker.

The sneering ignorance of the privileged and the dead aside, 'Warrior Within' tells an intelligent tale on par with mainline Legacy of Kain entries. It expects us to intuitively understand psychological bifurcation, the routine possibility of holding unspoken goals in mind. It doesn't expect us to apply ultra-naive 3D spacetime to every twist and turn in the story - it recognizes that the philosophy of time is a complicated affair. Should you be corrupted with some Cinema Sins neurotype, the plot beats will agonize you. As if the Prince's expository monologues are not enough, you will cry for formal explanations - your narrative choccy milk and nuggies to keep your clockwork brain well-oiled and safe from novel stimuli.

Unlike many ill-fated conceptual reboots, the Prince of Persia fan base grew up with 'Warrior Within.' As they grew into angry middle-aged men fighting fatal odds, the delicate craftsmanship once derided as 'edgy' became strikingly quaint. For this game is the product of French degenerates for whom Marquis de Sade is tame and normalized - they understand that blood and grit adds authenticity to a setting, provided it is done with a certain level of respect and literary attentiveness.

As a result, the free-form combat system and innovative platforming fade into the background of ultravibe. What one remembers about 'Warrior Within' is a flurry of emotion - loneliness, isolation, anger, melancholy. Everything from the Prince's evolved backstory, to the muted colour palette, and hostile rewilding of Iranian architecture services this cluster of moods. It is a truly unforgettable entry, certain to cement itself in your mind - even if you should be a Marvel Adult who rejects every artistic priority baked into 'Warrior Within.' For a culture spiralling into self-parody with its relentless opposition to sincerity and exuberance, this antipodal game is certain to continuously revitalize itself within that cultural memory. A shadow chasing the sons of plunder, leaving enchantment wherever they demystify and desacralize our darkest dreams.
