---
category: early-blog
comment: Blog mentioned at https://www.twcenter.net/threads/blogspot.230455/ (itself from an old account of https://www.twcenter.net/members/madej.96599/)
date: 2010-03
public: false
slug: tw3kr-kalam-cosmological-argument-fails
source:
  type: blogger
  url: https://web.archive.org/web/20100806184718/http://tw3kr.blogspot.com:80/2010/03/kalam-cosmological-argument-fails.html
title: Kalam Cosmological Argument Fails
---

To begin, the big bang singularity in theory is the cause of the current state the universe is in, the beginning of time and space - not necessarily the origin of the intersecting presence of the universe itself but it's current laws - yes. The cause for the big bang singularity is completely an unknown. The best established theory starts from quantum fluctuations, the change from potential energy to kinetic energy. Before the big bang, the universe was in a quantum state. There is no real need to ask where quantum fluctuations come from, since the universe was in this quantum state before the big bang singularity, causality breaks down at the sub-atomic level, the condition the universe was in at the beginning. Without time or space, the principle of causality does not apply. It's highly contested how much of logic you can apply to the aphysical. Inherently, since it was in this quantum state before the big bang, it adheres to the uncertainty principle. There essentially can be no "nothing" in our universe as long as there is a generation of energy (virtual particle pairs) which does not violate the conservation of energy law. There is no miracle or otherwise required to create the energy within the universe. Since virtual particle pairs create energy all the time, the big bang singularity does not come about by simple chance, but more of a process that occurs with this consistency and their irregularity. The laws of thermodynamics, which the universe adheres to, states that absolute zero energy is not possible. There never was nothing in our universe. The term "nothing" is used loosely, when we full know that quantum fields still exist within something we call "nothing'. Energy can be positive and negative, all the matter in the universe is counterbalanced by negative gravitational energy. It's always in a state of zero energy, so it violates no laws of energy conservation.

1. Whatever begins to exist, has a cause of its existence

   Saying everything is an assumption as it bases on our linear, limited, subjective perception of reality when trying to deal with objective science. Virtual particles, for example. It's not uncommon for particles to jump in and out of existence without a definable cause - at least not yet.

2. The Universe Began to exist

   The quantum state, is essentially what we know to be the earliest form of the universe, pre-big bang, the conclusion that the universe always existed in the quantum state is not exactly illogical. It would be illogical to state that the universe existed forever in time which would be make it a philosophical impossibility to exist in the present - but time didn't always exist.

3. Therefore, the universe has a cause of its existence.

   Currently we have a theory on the big bang singularity. Premise 1 is false, but even if premise 1 was true, using the same logic as premise 1, the quantum field act as a first cause for the big bang singularity, as I stated earlier. 
